
##How to deal with unresponsive SMEs?
 
Writing documentation is a hard nut to crack, as creating effective documents requires in-depth knowledge of difficult topics. In other words, to explain to diverse users at different levels of advancement how a given product works, you have to know the subject very well. 
You may be wondering where to find all the data, necessary to deliver accurate information. The answer is - if you want to get acquainted with every little detail on the technology you write about, you have to collaborate with Subject-Matter Experts. SMEs are usually engineers, designers or customer service support specialists who possess comprehensive expertise in their respective domain. Due to their vast experience and senior position, they are snowed under with their own work. Thus, at times, it may seem impossible to get a reply from them. I have put together a few tips that will increase the likelihood of receiving a message from your unresponsive SME.

#1.   	Make friends
Being kind and polite makes people like you and, as a result, more willing to cooperate with you. Show your SMEs that you care about them as friends: engage in friendly conversations, discuss your shared interests, bring them coffee or invite them to lunch. Your courteous behavior will not go unnoticed, in fact – it will earn you their respect. Remember that being on good terms with your co-workers not only enhances the working environment, but it can also help you acquire essential information, as people who are fond of your company will talk to you with pleasure.
#2.   	Be understanding and send reminders
It may happen that your SMEs suddenly stop responding to your inquiries. Their lack of contact could be caused by a multitude of reasons. Perhaps, they are busy putting out fires with their own tasks, or their inbox is overflowing with emails and your message is buried among them. In this case, try to be understanding and send a friendly reminder email stating that they owe you a meeting. Such notification should prompt them to respond. However, if you still do not receive a response, attempt to contact them personally, at their office. Remember that it is very important to remind your SMEs about your message, or else they may forget about it and you will end up with an incomplete project.
#3.   	Set deadlines and meet regularly
You must always be up-to-date on the subject you are write about in order to create effective documentation. Therefore, it would be a good idea to schedule regular meetings with your SMEs, who will clarify the emerging questions and thus enable efficient development of your document. However, if such frequent meetings turn out to be impossible, remember to set a deadline for your SMEs by which you must inevitably obtain the necessary information. Pick a date that is at least two days earlier than the deadline for submitting your documentation so that you can finish your work on time.
#4.   	Be prepared and professional
Before you start asking questions, do as much research as possible. By delving into the topic, you will avoid asking about trivial issues and instead focus on more specific ones that cannot be solved without the intervention of an expert. 
It is a good idea to write a list of topics that you want to address and send it by email so that your SMEs can also prepare and estimate how much time the conversation will take. During the meeting or the phone call with your SMEs, do not hesitate to make notes. The collected materials can facilitate your work and save your time because you will not ask about the same issue several times. Remember that always being prepared and specific will make you seem highly professional.

Working with people can be extremely difficult, and the lack of responses from them - frustrating as it delays the performance of your own duties. However, by following the above advice, you will be considered as a competent, understanding and friendly person, which can surely gain you recognition from your SMEs. They will be happy to help and provide the information you desire.
